---
title: What is burnout?
layout: post
date: 2021-07-06 08:00
image: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1617720097949-d6fd9ed1d71b?ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format
headerImage: true
tag:
    - burnout
    - masters
    - thoughts
star: true
category: blog
author: silvadenis
description: Do you know what really is burnout?
bibliography: burnout_review.bib
nocite: "[@*]"
---

As part of my master's on Digital Management at Hyper Island, I'm working on my thesis and then I decided to take a deep look on an issue that many individuals may face in the careers, an organizational issue that oftenly is underestimated.

Today I feel that organizations provide a individualistic approach on mental healthcare, they offer gyms, massage, discount in other services, but the problem the person that needs to take care. So the idea is not to look burnout in a personal level, but actually in a organization level. How organization can actively avoid burnout, what are is the role of the direct managers on this? And the most intriguing question that I have, is it possible to use machine learning to predict burnout?

So in this series of thoughts that I'm writing I will share with you my process on understanding what is burnout, and how to measure it.

## What is burnout?

Two scientific articles published in 1974, one by Herbert Freudenberger
(1974) and another by Sigmund Ginsburg (1974), described the burnout
syndrome as a state of becoming exhausted by making excessive demands on
energy, strength, or resources in the workplace
[@Heinemann_Heinemann_2017]. Currently, this job-related unresolvable
stress [@burnout], is recognized as a disease under the 11th revision of
the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11) by the World
Health Organization as an occupational phenomenon instead of a medical
condition. With this classification, we can conclude that it is not only
an individual situation but also an organizational problem
[@beyond_burnout] that requires an organizational solution, and
organizations often overlook this aspect.

Burnout is seen in three dimensions [@who_burnout]:

-   Exhaustion: Feelings of energy depletion or exhaustion;

-   Cynicism: Increased mental distance from one's job or feeling of
    negativism or cynicism related to one's job; and

-   Efficacy: Reduced professional efficacy.

Exhaustion is often considered the strongest, a primary element of
burnout. Thus, a suitable proxy for the entire phenomenon but a focus on
just exhaustion may ignore other aspects of the burnout experience,
which go beyond chronic fatigue. People experiencing burnout are not
simply exhausted or overwhelmed by their workload. It is much more
complex. They also have lost a connection with their work, which has
implications for their motivation and identity [@bianca_burnout].

The cynicism aspect capture disaffection with work and creates a
distance between the person and the work. The inefficacy aspect of
burnout leads to a crisis in their efficacy expectations, and
professional goals [@latent_burnout].

If we do a combination of those three factors, we get five categories of
burnout levels [@latent_burnout]:

-   Engagement: Comfort feeling with work and a sense of belonging and
    pleasure;

-   Overextension: Only high exhaustion, with excessive workloads or
    sleep deprivation;

-   Disengagement: Only high cynicism, distant relationship with work;

-   Ineffectiveness: Only high inefficacy, low morale, and inability to
    cope; and

-   Burnout: At least a combination of high/medium levels of two out of
    three previous characteristics, burnout may affect people in
    different ways, from lack of enthusiasm until a needed
    hospitalization.

A report provided by Blind, a trusted community focused on tech
companies in the United States where verified professionals connect to
discuss, declares that in the sector at the end of 2020, 73%
professionals were burned-out as compared to 61% in mid-February
[@state_burnout], where the top three reasons denote:

-   No separation between \"work\" and \"life.\"

-   Unmanageable workload

-   Job security concerns

## Impacts of Burnout

Burnout often indicates that systems are under stress, but it affects
individuals. Either the stressor or the individual needs to change
[@burnout]. Moreover, often organizations tend to put the burden of
solving the problem on the shoulders of the employees [@beyond_burnout].

The primary consequences of burnout for organizations are absenteeism
and turnover intentions [@swider2010born]. This low-level engagement
also impacts teams' deliveries, and consequentially it correlates with
profit-and-losses. Nevertheless, for individuals, its impacts can be
much worse as severe burnout may be a form of depression, in which case
it needs to be recognized and treated as such [@burnout]. Major
depression needs expert psychiatric assessment and ongoing psychological
or psychiatric care and counseling.

## Who is more inclined to burn out?

In discussion with [@bianca_burnout], a psychologist with a master's in
occupational psychology, she described that dynamic individuals prone to
take on leadership roles and idealists that add much effort to reach
goals are more prone to this syndrome. There is a feeling of distress
for trying to accomplishing things that are not.

It is interesting to see that burnout risk decreases with age
[@burnout]. There is a view that people in junior positions are more
tendencious to accept un-manageable project timelines, for example, than
more senior roles that are more experienced and can detect failures at
earlier stages.

According to [@self_efficacy] results, it shows that individuals with
high neuroticism seemed to have more substantial levels of burnout when
they faced stress. In contrast, those with high general self-efficacy
had the lowest burnout.

While [@emotional_stability] says that, theoretically, low emotional
stability seems to operate as a kind of individual vulnerability to
stress or a diathesis, namely a basic predisposition to develop job
burnout-related symptoms. On the contrary, high emotional stability
represents personal resources that operate as a protective factor,
making individuals more resilient and thus less prone to develop job
burnout (Hobfoll, 1989, 2001) [@emotional_stability].

In discussion with a senior leader in the IT area regarding the
difference between people in the introversion-extroversion scale and how
they deal with burnout, she raised that burnout can happen to everyone,
but the more we knew about ourselves, the better. When we know more
about ourselves, we will know how to cope with stress and re-energize to
be back on track.

### A view on innovation burnout

\"Innovators are constantly being demanded of coming up with new ideas,
and if not adequately managed, burnout may arise and kill your
creativity that drives innovation\" [@innovation_burnout_podcast].

From previous experiences and discussions with creative workers to
elaborate this article, it is interesting to see how the emotions with
work go from pleasure to burden quickly. Creative workers may experience
moments of impotence, where there is a feeling of being stuck where
problems are unsolvable. However, the same people may experience moments
of mastery when their solutions come to life-impacting millions of
people.

In discussion with an experienced software developer, he related that
there is an endless run to catch up with the latest technologies, as it
evolves at a pace that only gets faster, which can lead to long hours of
work and study.

In the technological sector, unfortunately, overwork is celebrated
[@beyond_burnout], so to be an over-achiever needs to go beyond the
regular 40-44 hours per week.

Research from Gallup identified that employees with working weeks above
50 hours have more risk of burnout and rise even more substantially at
60 hours [@hours], it is essential to take into consideration how this
work is perceived. When people are motivated, and a match between
personal and organizational goals happens, people do more work but are
significantly less stressed.

Employees that very often or always experience burnout at work are
[@hours]:

-   63% more likely to take a sick day

-   23% more likely to visit the emergency room

-   2.6 times as likely to be actively seeking a different job

Besides the personal impacts of burnout, those are reasons to tackle
burnout because it affects its most important asset: people.
